---
layout: default
title: M2 Files
nav_order: 13
---

# M2 Files

M2 files are 3D model files used for smaller and animated models in the game, such as items, creatures, spells, players and smaller world props and houses.

M2 is a complex file format even when using editors like WBS, and this article does not aim to explain them fully. A proper technical outline of the M2 binary file format can be found on the [wowdev wiki](https://wowdev.wiki/M2)

## Overview

M2 files consists of various properties that define how they look:

- **Geometry**: The mesh data that makes up the model
    - **Vertices**: 'Points' that make up the edges of the model.
        - **Location**: The point in the models local 3D space where this vertex is located.
        - **UV coordinates**: Defines what part of a texture should be connected to this vertex when rendered.
    - **Triangles**: Defines what vertices should be connected to form a visible face of geometry. Triangles are the **only** geometric primitives supported by the game.
        - **Vertex indices**: 3 indices to vertices that form this triangle.
        - **Texture index**: Defines what _Texture_ this triangle uses.
        - **Material index**: Defines what _Material_ this triangle uses.
    - 

- **Bones**: Specific points in the model that can be used by animations to move mesh data around
    - **Billboards**: Some bones have special billboard settings for displaying small images that always face the viewer.
    - Rotation, movement and scale Can be animated in _Animation Tracks_

- **Colors**: Values that can be used to tint the entire model
    - Can be animated in _Animation Tracks_
- **Transparency**:
    - Can be animated in _Animation Tracks_
- **Textures**: Used to define what textures are displayed on the model
    - Specific texture entries are connected to individual triangles in the files geometry data.
    - There are a large amount of different types of textures that can be attached to an M2 model, but some of the most important ones include:
        - **Hardcoded**: A literal path to a blp file that should always be 
        - **Skin**: Used for creatures with different color variations
        - **Hair**: Used for character hair
        - **Clothing**: Used on character models where clothing can be applied by items.

- **Texture Animations**: Used to move textures around on the model
    - Can be animated in _Animation Tracks_

- **Collision**: Special geometry used for collision boundary checks.

- **Attachments**: Special parts of the models where things like helmets, shoulderpads, gloves, weapons or boots can be attached.

- **Events**: Special procedures that are called when certain animations play, primarily used to play footstep or death sounds.
    - [List of events in 3.3.5(?)](https://wowdev.wiki/M2#Events)
    - Can be animated in _Animation Tracks_

- **Materials**: Used to define special shader settings for triangles, like what [blending modes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blend_modes) they should use and how they should be affected by lighting.

- **Lights**: Parts of the model that can light up the geometry of the model itself, and to a limited extend the geometry around it in the world.
    - Can be animated in _Animation Tracks_

- **Cameras**: Points in the model used for displaying the model in portraits.

- **Particles**: Parts of the model that can be used to emit [particles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Particle_system)
    - Can be animated in _Animation Tracks_

- **Ribbons**: Special particle emitters commonly used for things like leaving _trails_ behind weapons or spells.
    - Can be animated in _Animation Tracks_

## Animations

M2 files support animations using two concepts:

- **Animation Definitions**: These are sequences of behavior that the client can cause a model to execute. For example, _walk_ is an animation, as is _stand_ and _attack with a 1h weapon_. 
    - This part of the model does not contain any actual animated data, as such data is tied to speific components using _Animation Tracks_.
    - Global Sequences: Some animations are not caused by specific events in the client, but always play for as long as the model is visible. Such animations are known as "Global Sequences".

- **Animation Tracks**: Parts of various M2 components that can have their behavior animated and tied to specific animation IDs. For example, bones can have animation tracks tied to a models _attack with a 1h weapon_ animation, causing the bones in the body to move in a manner that makes the model hit something in front of them.

## Skin Files

Skin files are parts of M2 files that can be used to store [Level of Detail (LOD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Level_of_detail_(computer_graphics)) data for models. Contrary to what some beginners believe, skin files do **not** contain different texture variation for creatures.

All M2 files have **at least** one .skin file, and that file is not optional.

Most model editors available do not handle more than a single .skin file, and do not produce more than one for each model.

## Editing M2 Files

M2 files can be edited using a large amount of different editors under the [tools](../tools) section of this website.